# Assignment 0: Getting Started

**Due: Thursday, February 12, 11:59pm CT**

This is a short "pre-assignment" to make sure that:

- Your C++ build system is set up correctly.
- You can work with the game engine framework that we began implementing in class.
- You can submit your finished code through GitHub.

We implemented the starter code for this assignment in the programming class on [Runtime Engine Architecture](https://github.com/CSCI-5980-Spring-2026/Programming-2). After you check out the code, you should familiarize yourself with the classes and modules, referring back to the video from class when necessary.

- **MainLoop** (Core Module): implements the execution flow of the game. This is an abstract class that should not be directly instantiated. An application or game will be a subclass that overrides any virtual methods.
- **Window** (Platform Module): wrapper class that provides a generic interface to an SFML Window. We keep the SFML Window isolated within this module so that our game engine can be potentially ported to other platforms or windowing libraries without having to rewrite the entire codebase.
- **Renderer** (Renderer Module): the class that implements the low-level rendering functionality using OpenGL. For now, it just draws a cube to the screen as a basic test that the graphics context is working.  In this assignment, you will change that code to draw something other than a cube. 
  *Note: Obviously, hard coding the drawn geometry in the renderer is not how a game engine is supposed to work. We will substantially expand this module and implement a scene graph in future classes.*

To complete the assignment, you will remove the code that draws the cube from the renderer and replace it something else. You are free to draw whatever you want, so long as it is not trivial. In other words, don't just define three vertices for a single triangle and call it done. 

The cube is drawn by defining an array of vertices, loading it into the vertex array, and then calling `glDrawArrays()` using `GL_TRIANGLES` mode. If you decide to draw a triangular mesh, you can follow the same steps, and your vertex array should contain at least 18 vertices (six triangles).  However, if we take a peek into `GL.h`, we can see that OpenGL offers many other low-level rendering modes:

```
#define GL_POINTS                         0x0000
#define GL_LINES                          0x0001
#define GL_LINE_LOOP                      0x0002
#define GL_LINE_STRIP                     0x0003
#define GL_TRIANGLES                      0x0004
#define GL_TRIANGLE_STRIP                 0x0005
#define GL_TRIANGLE_FAN                   0x0006
#define GL_QUADS                          0x0007
#define GL_QUAD_STRIP                     0x0008
#define GL_POLYGON                        0x0009
```

You are free to draw something using one of these other modes instead. Documentation and examples for all of them can be widely found online, and I'm sure that AI tools will be happy to explain them. However, note that vertices generated by LLMs can be a mixed bag. Occasionally they get them right, but quite often they make mathematical mistakes when it gets this low-level. These errors are usually quite obvious on visual inspection, but they can be difficult to track down.

If low-level function calls in OpenGL seems daunting, then these two tutorials can be a good starting point:

- https://learnopengl.com/Getting-started/Hello-Triangle
- https://www.falloutsoftware.com/tutorials/gl/gl5.htm

## Repository Setup

We are using GitHub classroom for submission of programming assignments. When you accept the first assignment, you will need to select your x500 from the class roster. The system will then create a new private repository with template code that is only accessible by you and the instructor. You will need to create a GitHub.com account if you do not already have one. Note that this is different from the University's github.umn.edu account.

**Step 1:** Create your private repository using the following link: LINK TO BE ADDED

**Step 2:** Your repository will be added to the [GitHub course organization](https://github.com/CSCI-5980-Spring-2026). You can then check out the code to your local machine. If you are not familiar with using `git` from the command line, then I recommend using a GUI such as [GitHub Desktop](https://desktop.github.com/).

## Rubric

Graded out of 5 points.

- Assignment repository created through GitHub Classroom. This one is basically a freebie. (1)
- Remove the cube code from the renderer and replace it with some other geometry, as described above (2).
- Take a screenshot of the finished program running on your computer and add it to the root folder of your assignment. You should name it either `screenshot.jpg` or `screenshot.png`. (1)
- To complete the assignment submission, you will need to fill out the required sections in `README.md` and push everything to GitHub. (1)

## Prerequisites

To work with this code, you will first need to install the following software (same or newer versions):

- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
- [CMake 4.2.1](https://cmake.org/download/)
- [LLVM 21.1.8](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/tag/llvmorg-21.1.8)
- [Ninja 1.13.2](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/releases/tag/v1.13.2)

On Windows 11, the easiest way to install these is to use the winget package manager.

```
winget install code
winget install cmake
winget install llvm
winget install Ninja-build.Ninja
```

**Important:** You will need to add the LLVM binary path to your system path environment variable. By default, this is installed in `C:\Program Files\LLVM\bin`.

## Visual Studio Code Extensions

You will also need to install the following VS code extensions:

- [C/C++](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools)
- [CMake Tools](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cmake-tools)
- [CodeLLDB](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vadimcn.vscode-lldb)

## MSVC Platform Libraries

Although we are using the LLVM compiler, our application will still need to link to the MSVC and Windows SDK libraries. Therefore, you will need to install [Microsoft Visual Studio Community](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/?q=build+tools) even though we are not using it as an IDE (there does not appear to be any way around this on Windows). In the installer, make sure to check *Desktop development for C++*, and then it will install the required dependencies.

## License

Material for [CSCI 5980 Spring 2026](https://github.com/CSCI-5980-Spring-2026/Syllabus) by [Evan Suma Rosenberg](https://illusioneering.umn.edu/) is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).