# Assignment 4: Collision Testing

**Due: Tuesday, April 28, 11:59pm CT**

In this assignment, you will extend the engine to support additional collision shapes, implement ray and sweep collision queries, and build a test scene that demonstrates these collision systems working correctly.

Late submissions will be accepted until *Monday, May 4*. As described in the [syllabus](https://github.com/CSCI-5980-Spring-2026/Syllabus), the late penalty is 5% per day, which can be reduced by spending late points.

## Rubric

Graded out of 20 points. Steps that are worth a single point are typically all or nothing. For steps that are worth more than one point, partial credit may be given for solutions that are reasonably attempted, but not entirely correct.

**Part 1: Collision Shapes** (8 points)

The starter code includes the sphere and box collider components we implemented in class.  For this part, you will need to extend the engine to support the following Bullet collider primitives:

- Cylinder 
- Cone
- Capsule
- Static Plane

The `MeshFactory::create_capsule()` method has been added to assist with visual testing. The `MeshFactory::create_plane()` can also be used for the static plane, but note the following key differences:

- Bullet's static plane collision shape is a mathematical plane defined by a point and a normal, so it extends infinitely.  The mesh generated by the `create_plane()` method contains two triangles with finite boundaries.
- Unlike the other Bullet collision shapes, the static plane cannot be moved dynamically after it has been added to the physics world. So, it is only useful for fixed geometry, such as a ground plane.

Each shape requires a collider component and a physics world registration function, each of which is worth 1 point.

**Part 2: Collision Shape Demonstration** (2 points)

The scene in `MainLoopTest` is initially empty. For this part, you should create mesh primitives with colliders that demonstrate all four new collision shapes working correctly.

You have a great deal of freedom in designing the scene, with the following requirements:

- The scene should contain *at least one* object for each of the new shapes.
- *At least one* cylinder, cone, and capsule should be dynamic. They could be animated by your game code, movable by the user, or a combination of both. 
- When two objects collide, something should happen in the scene. Note that simply printing collision information to the console is not sufficient, because we already implemented that in class.

This list defines the minimal functionality for full credit. Because this is open-ended, there are plenty of opportunities to go above and beyond these requirements for bonus credit (see below).

**Part 3: Collision Queries** (6 points)

For this part, you will need to add two new collision query methods to the physics world:

- A function that performs a ray test for the closest collider. It should take in a `Ray` and return a struct that contains the results from the collision query.
- A function that performs a sweep test for the closest collider. It should take in a `ConvexShape` and a `Ray`, and return a struct that contains the results from the collision query.

`Ray` is defined using two vectors in world space that define its start and end point. `ConvexShape` is an `std::variant` that can refer to one of four shapes supported by Bullet sweep tests: `Sphere` , `Cylinder`, `Cone`, and `Capsule`.  All of these types are already defined in `Types.hpp`.  However, you will need to define the output struct yourself.

The ray test function is worth 2 points, and the sweep test function is worth 4 points (1 point for each shape).

**Part 4: Collision Query Demonstration** (4 points)

For this part, you will need to further extend your test scene to show that collision queries are working correctly. Once again, you have the freedom to determine how you would like to demonstrate these functions. 

For the ray testing, you might consider using the mouse coordinates to create a pick ray and select an object in the scene using the right mouse button. You could then do something interesting with the currently selected object, such as change its material or animate it.

To assist with this, the following functions have been added to the engine:

- `Window::screen_to_ndc()` converts the mouse screen space coordinates to normalized device coordinates.
- `Camera::get_pick_ray()` takes in normalized device coordinates and returns a `Ray` in world space that starts at the camera position, intersects the coordinates on the near plane, and extends to the far plane.

If you would like a refresher on these coordinate systems, please check out online resources such as [LearnOpenGL](https://learnopengl.com/Getting-started/Coordinate-Systems).

For the sweep tests, it may be difficult to come up with ways to demonstrate all the different shape tests in the scene. So, for the sweep test function, it would be sufficient to just output the results to the console. If you choose to do that, then I would suggest using the number keys to switch shapes and then performing the sweep test using the right mouse button after the ray test. 

Note that these ideas are just one way to get full credit for this part. The key requirement is that you have demonstrated these functions working in the scene in some way. The ray test demonstration and sweep test demonstration are each worth 2 points.

**Bonus Challenge** (1 point)

As noted above, parts 2 and 4 are open-ended. The writeup describes base functionality that would receive full credit. However, there are plenty of opportunities to go above and beyond. For example, you could implement a more sophisticated scenario that uses these collision tests, such as a game prototype. Alternatively, you could also extend the physics world to support more of the advanced functionality in Bullet. Creativity is encouraged!


## Repository Setup

We are using GitHub classroom for submission of programming assignments. When you accept the first assignment, you will need to select your x500 from the class roster. The system will then create a new private repository with template code that is only accessible by you and the instructor. You will need to create a GitHub.com account if you do not already have one. Note that this is different from the University's github.umn.edu account.

**Step 1:** Create your private repository using the following link: [https://classroom.github.com/a/zT3RLJlU](https://classroom.github.com/a/zT3RLJlU)

**Step 2:** To gain access to your repository, you will need to check the email associated with your GitHub account for an invitation. Note that this may be different from your UMN email. Note that GitHub Classroom may show you a "Repository Access Issue" error. This can safely be ignored.

**Step 3:** Your private repository will be added to the [GitHub course organization](https://github.com/CSCI-5980-Spring-2026). It will already contain the starter code that was forked from the assignment template project. You can then check out the code to your local machine. If you are not familiar with using `git` from the command line, then I recommend using a GUI such as [GitHub Desktop](https://desktop.github.com/).

## Prerequisites

To work with this code, you will first need to install the following software (same or newer versions):

- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
- [CMake 4.2.1](https://cmake.org/download/)
- [LLVM 21.1.8](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/tag/llvmorg-21.1.8)
- [Ninja 1.13.2](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/releases/tag/v1.13.2)

On Windows 11, the easiest way to install these is to use the winget package manager.

```
winget install code
winget install cmake
winget install llvm
winget install Ninja-build.Ninja
```

**Important:** You will need to add the LLVM binary path to your system path environment variable. By default, this is installed in `C:\Program Files\LLVM\bin`.

## Visual Studio Code Extensions

You will also need to install the following VS code extensions:

- [C/C++](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools)
- [CMake Tools](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cmake-tools)
- [CodeLLDB](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vadimcn.vscode-lldb)

## MSVC Platform Libraries

Although we are using the LLVM compiler, our application will still need to link to the MSVC and Windows SDK libraries. Therefore, you will need to install [Microsoft Visual Studio Community](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/?q=build+tools) even though we are not using it as an IDE (there does not appear to be any way around this on Windows). In the installer, make sure to check *Desktop development for C++*, and then it will install the required dependencies.
